-

:
nu

Separating

Generally, experienced railroad maintenance per-
sonnel are familiar with different types of rail defects
and problems. Yet, there often appears to be a degree of
confusion among the same people with regard to the
several types of rail surface defects known as shelling,
spalling or flaking. In fact, these terms have been used
interchangeably to describe any surface defect associ-
ated with the gage corner on the head of the rail.

But there are significant differences. While spalling
and flaking refer to similar surface phenomena, shelling
is a distinctively different type of rail defect, having a
failure mechanism that is unlike spalling or flaking.

Spalling, or flaking, an example of which is illus-
trated in Figure I, is a localized degradation of the run-
ning surface of the rail. It is most commonly found at the
gage corner of the high rail. This condition often reveals
itself initially as head checks (micro-cracks) at the gage
corner. Usually these cracks are oriented at an angle of
45 degrees to the axis of the rail, and corresponding to
the direction of traffic. The microcracks tend to propa-
gate and coalesce into larger cracks or failure areas. In
turn, these can break out from the surface of the head of
rail. Spalling can also be found on the top surface of the
rail head, often on the running surface of the low rail in
curves.

Spalling, cr flaking, is a surface phenomenon. 1t is
shallow in depth, and is associated with areas of very

Figure I — Spalling is a localized degradation comntonly found at
the gage corner of the high rail.

21

Shelling or Spalling — . — . — . — . —

high contact stresses. Usually, these defects do not
progress deeply below the surface of the rail. Instead,
they progress about 0.030 inch below the surface,
towards the gage side of the railhead. Spalling appears
to be a surface fatigue condition related to high shear
stresses as well as normal contact stressing.

Inclusion source?

On the other hand, shelling, or more specifically,
Gage Corner Shelling (see Figure 2), is a progressive
internal separation that develops beneath the
cold-worked region at the gage corner of the rail. Such a
separation may propagate longitudinally along the rail
and ordinarily at an angle to the rail axis. It can crack out
at any level, usually near the upper gage corner.

As the shells propagate, they can turn down and in
to form a transverse separation, which is often referred
to as a detail fracture from shelling. This transverse
defect can develop at any stage of the shell’s longitudi-
nal propagation. And since transverse defects in general,
and the detail fracture in particular, are considered to be
causes of rail breakage under [oad with possible derail-
ment if not detected in time, these defects are particu-
larly dangerous.

Gage-corner shelling is a subsurface fatigue phe-
nomenon associated with high contact stresses at the
point of contact between the throat of the wheel and the

Figure 2 — Gage Corner Shelling, on the other hand, is a progres-
sive internal separation that can ‘crack out.’
gage corner of the rail. Research studies have linked
shelling with the presence of inclusions within the rail
steel —- particularly non-metallic inclusions.’

It is thus apparent that the two types of rail defects,
shelling and spalling, are in fact quite distinct from each
other, having differing appearances, occurrence mecha-
nisms, and failure modes,

Since these rail defects described have been found to
occur in the same locations, and are related to high con-

22

tact stress conditions, there is a reason for the confusion

between the two. In any event, these rail surface defects

appear to be on the increase (see Tracking R&D, January

1985). Therefore, the ability to distinguish between the

two is quite important.

References:

1. Rail Defect Manual, Sperry Rail Services. Danbury, Connecticut, 1964,

2. Sonon, D. E.. Pellegrino, J. V.. and Wandrisco, J. M.; “Metallurgical
Examination of Rails with Service Developed Defects (Rail Analysis
Volume 4)”, AAR R-300, March 1978.
